History timeline (#191)
FOSSRIT/fossrit.github.io: history.md

---
layout: page
title: History
slug: history

---

## One Laptop Per Child

One Laptop Per Child ([OLPC](https://laptop.org/)) was proposed by MIT in 2005 to [fight the gap](https://laptop.org/aboutolpc/) in access to technology in education for underprivileged children.

> Stephen Jacobs, director of RIT's Lab for Technological Literacy (LTL) at the time, was interested in the program and acquired three OLPC XO 1.0 laptops in 2007 via the first "Give One, Get One" program. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Prof. Stephen Jacobs](https://www.rit.edu/directory/sxjics-stephen-jacobs), director of RIT's Lab for Technological Literacy (LTL) at the time, was interested in the program and acquired three OLPC XO 1.0 laptops in 2007 via the first "Give One, Get One" program.
```

In January 2009, Rochester Institute of Technology had an honors class that developed educational games for the OLPC program. That was the earliest documented birth of Open-Source @ RIT. 

> Open-source advocates, such as Karlie Robinson and David Nalley, were brought in by Professor Jacobs to support the class. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Source advocates, such as Karlie Robinson and David Nalley, were brought in by Professor Jacobs to support the class.
```

Open Source in capitals because it is referring to a proper noun in this case: https://opensource.org/definition-annotated

Karlie Robinson introduced the students to the Sugar Labs' Math 4 initiative which was dedicated to supporting 4th grade curricula. 

> David Nalley, who was part of the Fedora community, donated 25 XO laptops to help students contribute to the Sugar initiative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
David Nalley, who was part of the [Fedora community](https://fedoraproject.org), donated 25 XO laptops to help students contribute to the Sugar initiative.
```

> David Nalley, who was part of the Fedora community, donated 25 XO laptops to help students contribute to the Sugar initiative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
David Nalley, who was part of the [Fedora community](https://fedoraproject.org), donated 25 XO laptops to help students contribute to the Sugar initiative.
```

Just making it clear that we are not talking about hats. 🙂

> This ended the first iteration of the class, but the seminar class went on for several more iterations, with more incredible open-source advocates joining the picture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ended the first iteration of the class, but the seminar class went on for several more iterations, with more incredible Open Source advocates joining the picture.
```

Sadly, the original history was based on an old [magic.rit.edu](https://web.archive.org/web/20150427134219/http://magic.rit.edu/foss/history.html) page, now it no longer exists.

> ## FOSSBOX:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## FOSSBox
```

> Estimated to have started in 2010, Stephen Jacobs hired Remy DeCausemaker to run the open source program. Remy was initially from the Red Hat Corporation so the club had a great foundation.

Reviewer 2: > Remy was initially from the Red Hat Corporation so the club had a great foundation.

@decause was also an RIT alum.

> Estimated to have started in 2010, Stephen Jacobs hired Remy DeCausemaker (RIT alumni) to run the open-source program. Remy was initially from the Red Hat Corporation so the club had a great foundation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Estimated to have started in 2010, Stephen Jacobs hired Remy DeCausemaker (RIT alumni) to run the Open Source program.
Remy was initially from the Fedora community so the club had a great foundation.
```

I am pretty sure @decause's chapter at Red Hat started well after his RIT chapter, but he was involved with Fedora from some time before Red Hat and I think before RIT too. I could be wrong, maybe he can help set the record straight here. 🙂

> Initially, it was set up as a semi-student club, but more of an informal student group called the Free and Open-Source Software Box (FOSSBOX). It served as a 24-hour access space that was housed in the innovation center (also known as Fish Bowl). FOSSBOX used an IRC channel on Freenode to communicate when not in the designated space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially, it was set up as a semi-student club, but more of an informal student group called the Free and Open Source Software Box (FOSSBox).
It served as a 24-hour access space that was housed in the Innovation Center (informally known as the Fish Bowl).
FOSSBox used an IRC channel on Freenode to communicate when not in the designated space.
```

> As the first group to introduce hackathons to the student population, FOSSBOX's impact on RIT's culture continues as several hackathons are run every semester.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the first group to introduce hackathons to the student population, the FOSSBox's impact on RIT's culture continues as several hackathons are run every semester.
```

> FOSSBOX also ran several of their hackathons when they were active, such as [Election Night Hackathon](https://fossrit.github.io/events/2019/11/05/election-night-hackathon/) and Random Hacks of Kindness, as well as several others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FOSSBox also ran several of their hackathons when they were active, such as [Election Night Hackathon](https://fossrit.github.io/events/2019/11/05/election-night-hackathon/) and Random Hacks of Kindness, as well as several others.
```

> The original Humanitarian Free and Open-Source Software (HFOSS) seminar class was accredited and students in that class commonly got introduced and involved in the student group as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software (HFOSS) seminar class was accredited and students in that class commonly got introduced and involved in the student group as well.
```

> Remy and FOSSBOX started the [course-to-coop life cycle](https://opensource.com/education/10/3/course-co-op-lifecycle-openinnovationrit) where students in open-source would receive co-op offers from companies that were funding and interested in open-source at RIT. This cycle repeated as those students graduated and got full-time offers and referred those who were in the student club for co-op positions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remy and FOSSBox started the [course-to-coop life cycle](https://opensource.com/education/10/3/course-co-op-lifecycle-openinnovationrit) where students in Open Source would receive co-op offers from companies that were funding and interested in Open Source at RIT.
This cycle repeated as those students graduated and got full-time offers and referred those who were in the student club for co-op positions.
```

> FOSSBOX may have been an informal student group at first but it grew to the point where a full-time staff member was managing FOSSBOX and undergraduate students had part-time paid roles doing the secretarial work for FOSSBOX, both of which were funded by a yearly payment by Red Hat Corporation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FOSSBox may have been an informal student group at first, but it grew to the point where a full-time staff member was managing FOSSBox and undergraduate students had part-time paid roles doing the secretarial work for FOSSBox, both of which were funded by a yearly payment by Red Hat.
```

> The FOSSBOX community operated for 9 years, collaborating with organizations in the local area such as [Hacks/Hackers](https://www.hackshackers.com/), [BarCampROC](https://rocwiki.org/BarCamp_Rochester), and the student club [CodeRIT](https://github.com/codeRIT).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FOSSBox community operated until approximately 2015, collaborating with organizations in the local area such as [Hacks/Hackers](https://www.hackshackers.com/), [BarCampROC](https://rocwiki.org/BarCamp_Rochester), and the student club [CodeRIT](https://github.com/codeRIT).
```

> ## LibreCorps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## LibreCorps
```

Founded in 2012, LibreCorps' first purpose was as a co-op program after developing educational games under the 'One Laptop Per Child' program.

> LibreCorps serves as an experiential learning program where students are deployed to work on real-world open-source software and data projects, supporting faculty partners with direct software development as well as community management, documentation, design, and other forms of non-code contribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LibreCorps serves as an experiential learning program where students are deployed to work on real-world Open Source software and data projects, supporting faculty partners with direct software development as well as community management, documentation, design, and other forms of non-code contribution.
```

> RIT LibreCorps has been partnered intermittently with the UNICEF Office of Innovation since 2014.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RIT LibreCorps has been partnered intermittently with the [UNICEF Office of Innovation](https://www.unicef.org/innovation/) since 2014.
```

As a successful pilot, LibreCorps reached up to 24 supported faculty-driven software projects!

## FOSS Minor

Beginning of the Fall 2014 Semester, Rochester Institute of Technology started to offer the first minor in [Free and Open Source Software and Free Culture](https://www.rit.edu/study/free-and-open-source-software-and-free-culture-minor).
The minor was brought about by additional courses offered by the School of Interactive Games and Media ([IGM](https://www.rit.edu/computing/school-interactive-games-and-media)).

> ## FOSS@RIT:

Reviewer: TBH, I don't think there was ever a "FOSS@RIT" community. It was always FOSS Box or FOSS@MAGIC. FOSS@RIT was just the GitHub organization that everything circled around.

Reviewer 3: news to me haha, i imagine FOSS@RIT started as just a generic center/unchanging name for the rest of this stuff to revolve around?

Reviewer: @MoralCode The FOSS Box and FOSS@RIT were equivocally the same thing.

FOSS@RIT is the name of the GitHub organization for all things open-source at Rochester Institute of Technology, however, the organization isn't very official. 
During the period of renaming from FOSSBOX to FOSS@MAGIC, this was what you would call the Open-Source hub, though interchangeable with the FOSS@MAGIC name.
The FOSS@RIT community was full of people with an interest in free and open-source software at RIT. At the time, FOSS@RIT had the initial purpose of keeping FOSSBOX alive.

## FOSS@MAGIC:

> When [Magic Spell Studio](https://www.rit.edu/magic/magic-spell-studios) was conceptualized, this organization was established to prioritize game development, which was where open-source got started on this campus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When MAGIC was conceptualized in the Simone Center for Student Innovation, it was established to prioritize game development.
However, many of the same drivers and organizers of FOSS@RIT were deeply tied into MAGIC, which was how the Open Source was reborn on the RIT campus.
```

Well, it did not really start there. 🙂

> This organization was managed by [Andrew Phelps](https://professorandrewphelps.net/) in 2015. Since the magic building was not completed at the time, they were relocated to the innovation center, in the exact location that FOSSBOX initially used. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MAGIC was managed and led by [Andrew Phelps](https://professorandrewphelps.net/) in 2015.
FOSS@MAGIC was headquartered in the Innovation Center, albeit without a dedicated physical space like the FOSSBox originally had.
```

> FOSS Hours were introduced, which helped increase the involvement of students and other interested parties. However, shortly after, Remy DeCausemaker left Rochester Institute of Technology to go work for Twitter, which made the open-source community lose its growing momentum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FOSS Hours were introduced, which helped increase the involvement of students and other interested parties.
However, shortly after, Remy DeCausemaker left the Rochester Institute of Technology in 2015 to go work for Red Hat, which made the RIT Open Source community lose its growing momentum.
```

The organization still had funding and students were still getting involved, events were being run and the organization finally was relocated to inside Magic Spell Studio, which was newly constructed. FOSS@Magic existed in this manner for quite a while, but things changed once Stephen Jacobs got conversations started with UNICEF Innovation, a Tech R&D department permanently part of the United Nations System.

> ## OPEN@RIT:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Open@RIT
```

In 2020, the [Alfred P. Sloan Foundation](https://sloan.org/) provided [financial support](https://sloan.org/grant-detail/10076) for an [open work](https://openworkdefinition.com/) organization led by the Rochester Institute of Technology’s Stephen Jacobs: [Open@RIT](https://openr.it/about/). 

> This program was situated just under Rochester Institute of Technologies Vice President for Research, [Ryne Raffaelle](https://www.rit.edu/directory/rprsps-ryne-raffaelle) and has been the home of open-source at RIT for the last four years. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This program was situated just under Rochester Institute of Technology Vice President for Research, [Ryne Raffaelle](https://www.rit.edu/directory/rprsps-ryne-raffaelle) and has been the home of Open Source at RIT since 2020.
```

"Past four years" will get outdated quickly, best to use absolute dates instead of relative dates.

> The program now participates in research projects, receives funding from grants, provides other organizations open source consultation, and hosts town halls for the open-source community on campus. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open@RIT participates in research projects, receives funding from grants, provides open source community consultation to faculty and staff, and hosts town halls for the Open Source community on campus.
```

## FOSS@MAGIC:

When [Magic Spell Studio](https://www.rit.edu/magic/magic-spell-studios) was conceptualized, this organization was made to prioritize game development, which was where open source got started on this campus.
This organization was managed by [Andrew Phelps](https://professorandrewphelps.net/) in 2015. Since the magic building was not completed at the time, they were relocated to the innovation center, in the exact location that FOSSBOX initially used. 
FOSS Hours were introduced, which helped increase involvement of students and other interested parties. However, shortly after, Remy DeCausemaker had left Rochester Institute of Technology to go work for Twitter, which made the open source community lose its growing momentum.
The organization still had funding and students were still getting involved, events were being run and the organization finally was located inside of Magic. FOSS@Magic existed in this manner for quite a while, but things changed once Stephen Jacobs got converstations started with UNICEF Innovation, a Tech R&D department permanently part of the United Nations System.

## OPEN@RIT:

> In 2020, the [Alfred P. Sloan Foundation](https://sloan.org/) provided [financial support](https://sloan.org/grant-detail/10076) for an effort led by the Rochester Institute of Technology’s Stephen Jacobs to design and launch an undergraduate-anchored program: [Open@RIT](https://openr.it/about/). 

Reviewer 3: while the classes (HFOSS .etc) are undergrad focussed, OPEN@RIT supports the entire RIT community.

> This program was situated just under Rochester Institute of Technologies Vice President for Research, [Ryne Raffaelle](https://www.rit.edu/directory/rprsps-ryne-raffaelle) and has been the home of open source at RIT for the last four years. 

Reviewer 3: I'm noticing a few small things throughout this that feel all little off grammar wise, like "was situated" vs "is situated", or "the program now participants" in the next line that may warrant a larger scale check to make sure the whole post is okay

Author: Yeah, I swept through it twice and fixed quite a few typos.

The program now participants in research projects, receives funding from grants, provides other organizations open source consultation, and hosts town halls for the open source community on campus. 
Although the name has changed to OPEN@RIT, the organization is still involved with faculty members of Magic.

### Individuals Information Contribution Credit:

> *axk4545

Reviewer 3: put spaces after the stars so markdown detects this as a bullet list and can format it properly

*Adrian Edwards
*Michael Nolan

> https://rocwiki.org/BarCamp_Rochester

Reviewer 3: do these links have context? it may be helpful to have them linked inline (if they aren't already) rather than chilling out at the bottom here

Author: The links were front the meeting notes with Michael Nolan, I did add them inline, but when we fixed the timeline history, this got re-added. Removing them.

RIT LibreCorps has been partnered intermittently with the [UNICEF Office of Innovation](https://www.unicef.org/innovation/) since 2014.
As a successful pilot, LibreCorps reached up to 24 supported faculty-driven software projects!

## FOSS Minor

Beginning of the Fall 2014 Semester, Rochester Institute of Technology started to offer the first minor in [Free and Open Source Software and Free Culture](https://www.rit.edu/study/free-and-open-source-software-and-free-culture-minor).
The minor was brought about by additional courses offered by the School of Interactive Games and Media ([IGM](https://www.rit.edu/computing/school-interactive-games-and-media)).

## FOSS@RIT:

FOSS@RIT is the name of the GitHub organization for all things open-source at Rochester Institute of Technology, however, the organization isn't very official. 
During the period of renaming from FOSSBOX to FOSS@MAGIC, this was what you would call the Open-Source hub, though interchangeable with the FOSS@MAGIC name.

> The FOSS@RIT community was full of people with an interest in free and open-source software at RIT. At the time, FOSS@RIT had the initial purpose of keeping FOSSBOX alive.

Reviewer 3: i wonder if this could use more. it seems up cut off fairly abruptly with this sentence on what FOSS@RIT was. maybe we could give it a bit of a new name/purpose? especially with the reboot (ish) of FOSS-hours and my interest in promoting student projects with the discord server

Reviewer 3: this may also make a good little mission statement for the "who we are" section of the homepage maybe

FOSS@MAGIC existed in this manner for quite a while, until 2020 when the global COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the on-campus experience.

## Open@RIT

In 2020, the [Alfred P. Sloan Foundation](https://sloan.org/) provided [financial support](https://sloan.org/grant-detail/10076) for an [open work](https://openworkdefinition.com/) organization led by the Rochester Institute of Technology’s Stephen Jacobs: [Open@RIT](https://openr.it/about/). 
This program was situated just under Rochester Institute of Technology Vice President for Research, [Ryne Raffaelle](https://www.rit.edu/directory/rprsps-ryne-raffaelle) and has been the home of Open Source at RIT since 2020.
Open@RIT participates in research projects, receives funding from grants, provides open source community consultation to faculty and staff, and hosts town halls for the Open Source community on campus.
Although the name has changed to Open@RIT, the organization is still involved with faculty members of MAGIC.

> ### Individuals Information Contribution Credit:

Reviewer 3: @jwflory u want to add yourself here? or maybe just link to this PR?

## FOSS@MAGIC:

When [Magic Spell Studio](https://www.rit.edu/magic/magic-spell-studios) was conceptualized, this organization was established to prioritize game development, which was where open source got started on this campus.
This organization was managed by [Andrew Phelps](https://professorandrewphelps.net/) in 2015. Since the magic building was not completed at the time, they were relocated to the innovation center, in the exact location that FOSSBOX initially used. 
FOSS Hours were introduced, which helped increase involvement of students and other interested parties. However, shortly after, Remy DeCausemaker had left Rochester Institute of Technology to go work for Twitter, which made the open source community lose its growing momentum.
The organization still had funding and students were still getting involved, events were being run and the organization finally was relocated to inside Magic Spell Studio, which was newly constructed. FOSS@Magic existed in this manner for quite a while, but things changed once Stephen Jacobs got converstations started with UNICEF Innovation, a Tech R&D department permanently part of the United Nations System.

## OPEN@RIT:

> In 2020, the [Alfred P. Sloan Foundation](https://sloan.org/) provided [financial support](https://sloan.org/grant-detail/10076) for an effort led by the Rochester Institute of Technology’s Stephen Jacobs to design and launch an official open source program: [Open@RIT](https://openr.it/about/). 

Reviewer 3: careful with the word "source". OPEN@RIT is more than just source code

Reviewer 3: wait i was looking at an old version. disregard
